Wilhelm Reich was one of the most original thinkers
of the last century, yet few know his name.
As with many other pioneers
in the fields of science and medicine,
Reich was too far ahead of his peers
to be allowed to flourish, but today,
50 years after his death,
James Demeo is picking up the gauntlet
and uses Reich's principles to take humanity forward,
including our understanding of sex and economics.
(ethereal music)
Wilhelm Reich is a very much misunderstood
person in the history of understanding life force energy.
And you have really made it your life's work to understand
what this man was doing to be able to connect dots
and bring it into common modern culture today.
Let's talk about first his beginning
in association with Freud
before we go into yours.
Okay,
Reich was a refugee
from conditions in World War I.
At the end of the war he came to Vienna,
took a university degree in Medicine,
and his residency was
partly with Sigmund Freud,
he became attracted to Freud's work,
became a devoted psychoanalyst,
and very quickly was brought up in the ranks
of the analytical movement to become one of Freud's
trainers for younger students.
And Reich is well-acknowledged as the leader
of kind of a rebel group within psychoanalysis,
was really looking to make social changes in the world
as a way to prevent neurosis in the first place,
rather than coming after the fact with only therapy.
So that was his start, was in Freudian psychoanalysis,
which is where he got familiar with the idea of libido,
the whole idea of sexual energy or emotional energy,
which, by the way, modern psychoanalysis kind of pu-pu's,
it's not a real essential thing for most of them,
but Reich took this idea of libido very seriously,
and talked about how
people's emotional energy was a real energy,
that their sexual energy
was something that functioned
that required fulfillment
in order for people to have a healthy psyche.
So that was the starting point of his interest in things
like emotional energy or energy dynamics,
biological energy, if you will.
Because that would be certainly one of the most
obvious and pervasive profound energies
that he could begin measuring, even, right?
Well, absolutely.
And at one point, he broke with Freud.
There was a break, basically on the issue
of the social ramifications of Freud's own theory,
as Reich described it,
that one really needed to have a change in things like
at the time,
women were not getting employed,
the divorce laws, there weren't, divorce was illegal.
Contraception was illegal, so you had
big problems with family and society,
and arranged marriages, loveless conditions,
and a lot of neurosis coming out of this.
Reich wanted to change these things socially.
The Freudians didn't, and of course, then,
the rise of the Nazis, some of the psychoanalysts
felt that they could get along with the Nazis,
Reich said, no, this is a social disaster,
and he fought against them, openly speaking against them,
and was, therefore, forced to flee,
first to Scandinavia and later to the United States,
but during this period of flight, of leaving Austria
and Germany to Denmark and later, Norway,
he did a series of experiments on bioelectricity
where he was attempting to measure
the emotional states of people
and also measuring sexual excitation.
He was long before Masters and Johnson,
Wilhelm Reich was doing this kind of research.
It's an incredibly important body of research,
but I'll summarize.
When people expanded pleasurably,
with like, ahh, great pleasure,
with one's beloved,
the dance of life,
this could be measured as a strong
increase in bioelectrical charge at the skin surface.
And, oppositely,
if a person had a great deal of anxiety,
a great deal of fear, contraction,
which you could see, somatically,
in the way they expressed themself,
if they lived a life of trauma
since the time of their childhood,
and had learned to restrain everything
and to become socialized
in a sex-negative society,
authoritarian society,
then their skin surface would lack that
bioelectrical charge.
They would have a low, weak,
bioelectrical charging at the skin surface
and an incapacity in most cases for pleasurable expansion.
And this is where Reich got the concept of
the psychic and somatic armoring,
or you may hear the term "human armoring."
Mmhmm.
And this is a term
that Reich developed very early.
And could you
ahead and explain that for us?
Well armoring is a
a combination of psychological
and somatic...
It's a dynamic
where people are restraining their impulses,
they're restraining their reaching out for things
that they would need, like reaching out for love,
reaching out for the kind of life that they want,
for the kind of work that they would like to do,
so they compromise.
This one I will be with, but I don't really love her,
but she gives me some sexual gratification,
but it isn't really what I want,
or the girl saying,
I really want that guy but, well, so-and-so here is
wanting to be with me,
Has a job.
He has a job,
all of the excuses that people have for compromising,
their potentials.
Reich was the first one to talk about this,
about the unity of psyche and soma,
that people's character,
their mental process came out of this larger emotional
energetic situation
of their life, and today
you see a lot of people talking about this
in so-called mind-body issues,
and Reich is acknowledged in many places
as the father of these
kinds of ways of viewing
the life, if you will.
And in some cases, he's not acknowledged,
but I think, if you look at Reich's original work,
in books like Function of the Orgasm, or Character Analysis,
which is an interesting book, Character Analysis,
is now used as a teaching text in hospitals
even the psychoanalysts will acknowledge it,
except they'll tell you to stop at part three,
don't read any farther, than part three.
Oh, what's beyond the door there?
Part three is where he talks about
the psychic and somatic aspects of life energy,
and he talks about the orgone energy.
That these biolelectical currents he was measuring,
Reich eventually came to appreciate this
as a small bioelectrical expression
of a much more powerful energetic force in the body.
And this is hotly controversial,
but there are aspects of it
that have been verified time-and-again
by different, classically-oriented researchers.
Harold Burr, for example,
with the whole electrodynamic field theory,
that was well-known in the fifties,
not so much today.
But he was doing similar bioelectrical measurments
and argued that the bioelectrical fields in people's bodies
could be measured out from their bodies
and that it was an expression of a larger life force,
if you will.
There are other people who have done
similar kinds of things,
but Reich was one of the first, if not the first
and his argumentation and the proofs that he gives
later in his work, I think are quite exceptional,
and nobody's ever really advanced significantly
beyond them.
There's so many directions, obviously,
to go with his work, and then,
with the work you're doing now.
From here, let's go ahead and we'll blend
your stories together in a minute
and we'll look at the information.
Now, you were a young graduate student,
now take the story from there.
Okay,
I was a young graduate student,
I had gotten a degree in environmental science,
and became deeply interested in Reich's work,
and it was a conundrum for me because
I really didn't want to hide and do this work secretly.
A lot of people advised me, get your Ph.D. first,
hide your real interests, and do this work on the side
and don't tell anybody, cause it's too controversial,
you'll never be able to get your degree.
That's reasonable advice.
In most contexts, that would be true.
I know a lot of people who when it got known
by their university professors that they were interested
in this kind of stuff, their programs were halted,
they were thrown out.
Let me insert one thing
that will help explain this, too:
Reich was arrested,
thrown in prison,
died in prison,
as I understand it?
That's right.
His works were banned, even burned,
That's right, the Food and Drug Administration.
Because they threatened the establishment,
so now you come along, a few years later,
this was in the fifties.
Yeah.
You come along, twenty years later or so.
Yes, in the late 1970's.
I got accepted to the University of Kansas,
to the graduate program in geography meteorology,
and I really wanted to study this stuff.
My adviser there was a marvelous fellow by the name of
Robert Nunley, Bob Nunley, he's been a president
since those days with the ISEM group,
the International Scientists for Energy Medicine.
Yeah, he's been a mover and a shaker in all kinds of
alternative stuff, so he was my adviser,
and he got fascinated with this also,
and supported me tremendously, and without his support,
I would have never accomplished what I did.
But, I focused
directly upon WIlhelm Reich's work
for my graduate program and basically was able to show
that parts of both his social theories,
which is what he called his
"sex-economic theory of human behavior,"
as well as his later orgone energy theories,
specifically with respect to atmospheric process,
had a powerful validity, and could be used
to make a new understanding,
some real breakthroughs, in fact.
What did you end up getting your Ph.D. in?
It's in the field of geography.
Okay.
Which is a very broad, interdisciplinary
kind of a science.
Right, it goes into some of the work
you're doing now, almost loosely speaking,
because your work is so broad.
Yes.
Okay, let's split streams here,
and first continue talking about
what he called sex economics,
what does that mean, sexual economics?
and go further into that study.
Yes, think of how a money economy functions,
where you describe the flow of money
and how it's regulated or not regulated and moved around
and held and reserved, and doled out,
and used efficiently
to increase the happiness of people,
or hoarded and held back in the hands of a few,
and irrespective of people's misery.
Now transpose that way of thinking
to the dynamics of sexual energy
of how people use their biological energy,
their emotional, sexual energy to reach out into the world
for fulfillment, for happiness, for generosity, giving,
receiving love and joy and happiness,
or, the opposite, holding it back,
being afraid, being punitive and aggressive.
When Reich talked about sex economy,
he's talking about the economy of human bioenergy,
and how this works not only on the individual level
to promote health or developing neuroses,
but then how that then translates out
into the larger society in the various social institutions.
So a social institution can be very protective
and life affirming, or it can be something that
demands life-negative punishments of people.
And that's a subject that became of great interest to me
in my own research.
Yes,
that's where I'd like to go,
because you wrote a book, it looks like a very
comprehensive volume, called Saharsia.
Saharsia, yes.
Saharasia, and it's very stark geographical area
of the world that also contains very stark psycology
and practices and so forth,
but before we even go into that,
when I'm listening to you, I'm thinking,
well, gee, that contraction fear-based, withholding,
which also extends to greed and so forth,
seems to represent much of the western world right now.
But it also represents a lot of the eastern world.
Are we in a period of history, perhaps,
that has been contractive by nature?
Well, the question is,
how did all this get started?
I mean, we can talk about that.
Compare the west to the east to Africa, to whatever,
all of the world's cultures, to a greater or lesser extent,
have been influenced in very bad way by these patterns
of social negation.
The question that interested me was,
how could it have all got started?
So, one of the argumentations Wilhelm Reich had was
that deserts were involved, that human beings,
living in hard, desert environments, somehow
developed a contractive,
restricted, angry
kind of way of living.
It's a harsh existence.
Based partly on this very harsh existence,
so I thought, well, we could test this by using
the cross-cultural data of, I found a database
of the standard anthropological literature of
over 1,000 cultures, and I valuated
each one of those cultures individually
for various social institutions related to
their treatment of babies, and children,
adolescents, women,
the tendencies toward social hierarchy and authoritarianism,
and if a society was very gentle and nurturing and loving
towards babies and children,
and if women had more equal status or equal status,
and you did not find this kind of aggressive hierarchy,
with emphasis upon military glory,
I defined those as the matristic cultures,
the peace-oriented cultures.
Oppositely, if a culture was hard, aggressive,
cruel, in all of these ways, pushing women down,
and having male dominance and glorification
of war and violence, this I defined as the
hard, patristic cultures.
And then I got a latitude and longitude coordinate
for each one of these cultures,
and I merely plotted them on the map
to see how they would match up to
the existing climate conditions around the world.
And what came out of this study was that
the very harshest desert environment in the world,
of largest geographical extent had, almost exclusively,
the largest number of these very harsh, patristic societies,
and this is the region stretching from North Africa
across the Middle East, and up into Central Asia.
I call this region Saharasia,
to define its unique environment,
as well as cultural characteristics.
Now that body of work had other ramifications,
because this large geographical territory of desert,
simply did not exist prior to around 4000 B.C.
Before then there was a period of very wet, lush,
forested grassland conditions, so that,
when you looked at the maps of this,
the question demanded an answer.
What was the condition like in that area
before the desert formed?
So I began looking at archaeological evidence
for early violence and warfare,
and I started making my own database,
time and location specific of unambiguous evidence
for warfare and social violence,
and I made another discovery out of this,
is that you can only track back warfare and social violence
to around 4000, 5000 B.C.
There's a few examples prior to that in very early
phases of desert situation,
but for the most part, it drops away to nearly nothing
after around 4 to 5000 B.C.,
or before that period when it very wet and lush.
And when you start to see the first earliest signs
of human violence and warfare,
starts in those areas of Saharasia
which are beginning to dry out earliest.
And from there, there's a geographical spreading of warfare,
social violence, chaos,
destruction, in settlements,
you begin to see fortification walls, weapons of war,
all the unambiguous evidence from archaeology
beings to appear in dramatic abundance
after that climate transition.
When survival
becomes the prime directive.
Where survival has become the prime directive.
You think of what we know of cultures
that experience mass starvation,
where there's no United Nations coming in
with food supplies and so on,
you see half the population dies,
the family structures break apart,
children are abandoned,
it's like an atomic bomb has gone off in these societies,
and after the rains come back one or two generations
later, in some cases, the society is changed,
so dramatically from its original soft, emotional,
loving, kind of nurturing quality,
it's become hard and aggressive.
What I argue is that the mythology of our species
in many different languages, from all around the world,
speaks about an early period of a garden existence,
The garden of Eden,
it's in all of the ancient literature.
It's not just in the Judeo-Christian tradition,
it's in Hindu, in, you know, you name it.
And it seems to reflect a real-world situation
prior to around 4 to 5000 B.C.
Now I'm not the only one to write about this,
Riane Eisler has written books about this,
The Blade and the Chalice author,
Marija Gimbutas, to a lesser extent,
but my work is, I think it's the only global study
with this this kind of quantitative data
systematically looking at the question.
Let me ask you, conversely,
just for our own edification,
where are the areas of the world that are still
that remain lush to this day?
I mean, we can look at Southeast Asia, for example.
Did those effects from this
arid kind of hardening
of the cultures, extend then even into the lush areas?
Absolutely, abosolutely.
And this is another controversy.
I call my book Saharasia, "a marriage of heresies."
(laughs)
As part of the dynamic of the spreading of violence,
you see Europe gets invaded and overrun
by tribal groups coming out of Central Asian deserts.
You think of the early civilizations of the Etruscans
and the Dorian Greeks, and all kinds of invaders
who sweep over Europe, one group
after the other after the other
making things more violent and chaotic.
Then in China, it's the same,
the Shang Chinese, then the Chao, then all kinds of groups
invading out of the deserts into mainland China,
and this peaceful kind of elegant village life
which was actually very artistic and developing.
And Southeast Asia, beautiful.
Gets overrun progressively,
and you have the big emperors.
We could argue they still do with the Communists.
Africa, the same.
The relatively, or the peaceful societies
of sub-Saharan Africa are being overrun
by tall warrior-types, the Bantu speakers
Where you begin to see patriarchal, tribal existence,
which, it's been complicated by European Colonialism
and the legacy of slavery, absolutely
but there's this family structure aspect
that nobody wants to talk about,
which gives rise to all kinds of social violence
there as well.
Then you have the problem of
ocean voyaging groups,
and what I found is that
the scholars who are arguing
for pre-Columbian contacts, pre-Columbian contact theory,
for the origins of some of these groups like,
Maya, Inca, Aztec, and so on,
these are exactly the places that my Saharasia maps also
give evidence along this line.
I was just going to ask you about that.
So, the social violence that we find
in the New World, first of all, is at a much lower level
among the Native Americans
than what it is in the Old World.
The Native Americans, by-and-large,
people often say "Dances With Wolves" you know,
if you remember, Dances With Wolves had peaceful
Indian cultures, but it also had a couple of
violent ones, really bloody massacre
and that seems to be what the New World had,
with by-and-large mostly very matristic,
low-violence level cultures,
but with certain areas where you had these invader groups,
that came in from the Old World before Columbus,
and created these pyramid-building cultures
where they committed human sacrifice
and all kinds of things like this.
Of course, when Columbus came,
another wave came, especially with the Spanish,
who were quite brutal.
And they had the Moorish influence as well,
in terms of their own culture, right?
Well, the Spanish lived under 400 years
of Moorish invasion.
Yeah.
Before them, Spain was not quite so harsh.
Exactly.
After that, what was it, in 1491,
when then ejected the Moors, and in 1492,
the New World is discovered
with all the mythology about the cities of gold,
so all these conquistadors, a whole caste of warriors,
What are we gonna do now that we've kicked out the Moors?
Well, let's go to the New World!
Off they went and created havoc there as well.
The history of the world is,
when you talk about it like this,
it's another way of looking at it,
because we're looking at the status of women,
we're looking at the treatment of children, and babies,
about the sexual lives of people,
and how that gives rise to social violence and warfare.
And contraction, energetically.
And energetic contraction, yes, the whole
I mean, people become contracted on a social-wide basis,
just as you can have dysfunctional families
with an alcoholic father, a miserable marriage
between the mother and the father,
and the mother is neglectful and angry all the time,
and the children are fearful and withdrawn,
and they're not thriving very well emotionally
or intellectually,
you can have entire cultures that fall into that
situation of dysfunctional cultures,
and this is, of course, a terrible taboo,
you're not supposed to talk about other cultures like this,
because we begin to have,
if you begin to make so-called value judgments.
Well, I think it is important
that you make these kind of value judgments.
If you remember, well, none of us were alive at this time,
but during the World War II period, and immediately after,
the scholars of the day tried to understand
what the hell went on with Germany,
where this high-technology culture
of great intellectual sophistication,
And artistic.
A great culture of art and science,
collapsed into this fascism, what went on?
So you had what they called "national character studies."
Today that is taboo.
Nobody studies national character anymore,
because everything has to be equalized.
And I ran into this in the universities,
because my Saharasia work was the antithesis of that,
It brought back this whole issue of
making careful judgments about
how people raise their kids
and what influenced the larger society in terms of
the potentials for violence.
So this kind of work is talked about more outside
of the universities than within them, unfortunately.
because the universities... they're not very tolerant
towards this kind of discussion,
anymore than they are...
Because it's not politically, P.C.
It's very un-P.C., isn't it?
So, why did you go for it?
I want to know what you know.
Okay, well, I did that work,
but I also did another bit of heretical work,
while I was still in the universities, and that is...
It comes out of my interest in deserts, and desertification,
the whole issue of spreading deserts, because,
We're in that era now.
This was my classical research work, was deserts,
and what could you do to green deserts?
And there's this guy, Wilhelm Reich,
and he's controversial enough on Sigmund Freud
and psychoanalysis, his sex economic work,
if he had just stopped there,
his name would be written into history
in a very positive way,
but late in his life, he's doing all this work on bioenergy,
and orgone energy, and the accumulator,
orgone accumulator, and he gets into trouble
with the Food and Drug administration,
and they burn his books and throw him in jail.
Hey, I'm curious!
I'm the kind of guy if I hear it's been banned in Boston,
I wanna know why is it banned in Boston?
So then the most outrageous thing,
outrageous in a good way, I would say,
that Reich was claiming was that
this energy that's in out bodies extends out
into the atmosphere.
There's a field of this energy surrounding the Earth,
and it has variations in it,
in the way that it moves,
it's a pulsatory energy continuum.
He says it goes out into space,
like the old ether theories of 19th century physics,
And one of the devices that he developed
which led him to this conclusion,
is called the cloud buster.
So I'm looking at this and saying, cloud buster,
wow, that's fascinating,
here I know some of Reich's other work is true,
because I've tested it out myself,
I also tested the orgone energy accumulator,
which we can talk about,
but I tested out cloud busters, as well,
as part of my university research,
I built one of these devices,
I went to some of the scholars in the United States
that had studied with Reich, and I studied with them,
so I would get it right,
and I built one of these devices
and we tested it out
and used the database of a weather
precipitation and cloud-cover data
from the state of Kansas,
and proved that this device actually could influence
the weather over a large, statewide region.
And this was a mind-blower, because this was
as big a controversy for physics and meteorology
as the other stuff was for sociology and psychology.
So that work I continued with privately,
because I tried to get funding and so forth,
and it was difficult.
It's hard to say what led
to my basic excommunication
from the academic world.
Sounds like a bit of everything.
Combined with verifying Reich's sex-economic work,
with Saharasia, and then getting positive results
on the cloud buster,
see, a lot of my colleges thought, well, Demeo,
he's just doing another one of his crazy things,
he'll test the cloud buster and he'll show
that it doesn't work.
I mean, I've always been an honest academic,
I'm gonna go with what the data says,
and I got positive results,
so this stunned a lot of people.
I had supporters, I had detractors,
and for about 10 years, I continued
teaching in different universities.
After I left University of Kansas, I was teaching
at Illinois State University, and a few years later
at the University of Miami in South Florida,
then at the University of Northern Iowa,
and at that point it was clear,
I was one of these guys that,
thank you for your service,
you've taught here for three years, adios,
and then go to the next place,
and you work there for another three years,
and you don't get the tenure-track positions
if you're doing controversial work,
so I decided at some point I should
devote myself through my own institute,
which is what I did in 1988,
I stepped out of the university system
and just began going for my own institute.
Now, it's interesting, right at that time,
some of my work began to be published,
and got to be known,
I was presenting my work to some of the scholarly societies,
like the Association of Arid Lands Studies,
and the American Association of Geographers,
and through this network of different people,
and working outside the universities,
I was asked
to undertake some research projects,
some application projects for drought abatement
in different parts of the world.
I had done a study in Arizona
applying Reich's cloud buster
in 1989, for example,
and it was on five pre-announced dates,
went into Arizona, used this cloud busting device
for a couple of days, then went home,
and after a whole summer of doing this,
we took the data, aggregated it for something like
4 or 500 rain stations in the region,
and it was able to show
that the rainfall
is going along like so and we do our cloud busting work,
and there's a leap upwards, a doubling
of the amount of rain for about a week
after each one of these tests.
So we got a rainfall doubling effect over immense areas.
And the rainfall is monsoon season in Arizona,
so this is when you'd be doing that,
that's why the summer there, right?
That's when there's a natural accumulation?
Starting from May through...
May, June, July, August,
about through September.
Which, that's the perfect time to do it.
So you could really see the steps.
So you could see the effects,
it wasn't really trying to break a drought,
just so much as to see if the rainfall statistics there
would match what we got in Kansas,
working in a desert region
in the desert Southwest, and it did.
So this was a breakthrough because it showed
the same technology that would work
in relatively wet conditions of Kansas
would also work in dry lands like Arizona.
And nobody has, cloud seeding generally won't work
in a dry land area if you don't have
pre-existing cloud cover.
So then I got an invitation from
the government of Israel,
so I was asked by the Israeli government
during a period of drought,
they had about three years of drought,
with the lowest level of their main reservoir,
Lake Kinneret, which we call the Sea of Galilee,
was down to about one centimeter above the red line,
which means they only have that much water left
before they were no longer allowed to take water out
so it would have been a catastrophe
for their agriculture,
so they asked me to come there and try this device out,
which I did, and we worked it for about,
about ten days on and off at different stations in Israel,
and then with a final operation that was
designed to bring in the jet stream
and big pulses of moisture,
and within a couple of days,
they had the biggest rainstorm they'd had
in those three-year periods,
and one of the things
that this cloud busting device does is,
restores what Reich called "atmospheric pulsation"
so you use it and then it's like acupuncture,
you get the energy flow restored,
and there's a natural pulsation that gets set up,
of rain, dry, rain, dry, like in nature,
it restores the natural energetic pulsation,
and the rains come afterwards.
And that's what happened, throughout the whole rainy season
of that year, '91, which was their wintertime period
when the get all their rains,
they had these immense pulses of rain fall
and it broke all their records going back 100 years.
They had more rain during that one wintertime period
than they had previously in 100 years of record keeping.
Lake Kinneret filled to overflowing,
they had to open the dam that allowed the sweetwater
to go into the Dead Sea, which, in Israel, is unheard of
because that is a so-called waste of water,
but they had to because otherwise, it would have flooded
the coastal cities of Tiberius and other villages
around the lake, so they opened the dam
and let the water go as it did by nature
years before irrigation agriculture got started.
And it was an immense breakthrough,
I thought, now we're gonna get some support,
some serious openness, we can start applying this,
we'll green the Negev.
Yeah.
It didn't happen,
because the meteorologists were against it.
They claim, they're like classical medical doctors are
to alternative medical treatments, you know?
The meteorologists, they said, well,
This, your cloud busting had nothing to do with it,
it had to do with Mount Pinatubo
erupting on the other side of the Earth six months earlier.
Oh, well.
Oh well, okay, so I got another good data set
and we showed the results,
I published a good paper about it,
and I had two other major projects
that came in the '90's, one was in Namibia,
where another three or four year drought ongoing,
the whole Southern part of Africa affected,
there, they were looking at starvation.
Same results?
Same kind of results, very positive,
breakthrough in rains,
and the guy who ran their meteorology department was a...
Afrikaaner, Christian guy,
a boor type,
very fundamentalistic fellow,
and when I went into the office to meet him,
and to introduce myself,
because he knew that we were traveling around,
we're again, invited by the Namibian government,
with help from some of my friends in Germany
that made the contacts for me.
When I went into his office, he said,
"'Only God can make it rain, get the hell out of my office!"
(laughs)
Maybe you're in closer contact with God!
So, okay, I've got another good day to set,
publish another couple of papers on the subject,
and a few years roll by, and
I'm doing other things, you know,
if the world doesn't want this, okay,
I can live with it, I got other things to do,
but then, I got called by, in 1993,
I got contact with the government of Eritrea,
through a friend who was the son
of the former Italian ambassador to Eritrea.
They had made contacts with the meteorologist there
who was all in favor of giving us a try,
because Eritrea was a newly formed nation,
which had been at civil war far 30 years with Ethiopia.
And they broke away, formed their own new nation,
and this wasn't going to go anywhere
in terms of social development because not only the poverty,
the grinding poverty there, but 30 years of drought.
How are you going to get your agriculture going?
It's just a devastation.
So I was asked, what could be done?
And this time I said, okay, I will come and do this,
but I want your word, if we get positive results,
that you will commit to a five year research program.
We'll do this for five years, and then
we'll assess the data,
then we can go to some large international body
and talk about integrating this with something
like the United Nations Environmental Program,
or some big agency, because this is,
you could green the world's deserts, for God's sakes,
this is a breakthrough, a major breakthrough.
So okay, we get some private funding,
because Eritrea doesn't have money.
We get some private funding,
and we go to Eritrea, we have a whole team of people,
we build the devices there, we go out into the field,
and basically, we end a 30 year drought cycle,
it's right in the data of the Climate Data Analysis Center
of NOAA, you know,
you have 30 years of drought below normal levels of drought,
and then here's our little cloud busting operation,
up comes the rain for the first time in 30 years
above normal.
And what we saw when we were there, was, of course,
we got it all on video, and it's all...
Some future documentary will be made about all this,
but it broke through the rains,
and immense rainfall,
like they had not seen.
The older Eritreans said, "Ah, I remember,
"this is the way it was 30 years ago
"when I was a young kid."
What I'm talking about is not isolated thunderstorms
that come typically in a desert and dump
and then they're gone,
but big, massive rain fronts that cover huge areas,
and drizzle, and rain, and drizzle, and rain
all day long.
That's the kind of rains they got
following our operations.
So the Eritreans, their eyes are like this,
and they wanna know more,
and they decide, okay, even though we're a poor country,
we're going to pay your expenses,
and we'll have you do it here for the five years.
And they agreed to it, and I was happy.
So we went back for three more years
and we did it, again, the same results,
each of these years.
Amazing, wonderful rains.
Their agriculture popped way up.
In fact, one of the statistics was
in the year before we started doing our work,
they had spent $150,000,000 a year on food import.
It had dropped to about $10,000,000
on the years when we had finished.
Then, unfortunately,
the war with Ethiopia came back again.
And you had Ethiopian jets bombing
the Asmara airport,
and they were looking around for targets of opportunity,
and I don't know if you know
what a cloud buster looks like,
but it looks like a piece of artillery,
it's got these long tubes,
and it's pulled behind a vehicle on a trailer.
And I got very worried our team might get shot up,
or something, so
they didn't have have money to pay for our expenses anymore,
anyhow, we went one last year on our own money,
which was just a...
Because we felt we wanted to finish this work,
so the project, I pulled the plug on the project in 1999
And that was our last year.
And we were feeling horribly depressed,
all of our team were, and we had an international team,
people from Italy, people from Germany,
local Eritreans who would put out their heart
to get this going and who loved the results.
I'm almost reluctant to say this on camera,
but there was a result that was nearly unbelievable.
Let's just say it's an unbelievable result
Against all odds.
In December of about 2000,
comes a report from NOAA:
Gigantic New Lakes Appearing in the Sahara Desert.
Just South of the Aswan dam, or, excuse me,
just North of the Aswan dam, but it's all based upon
incredible increased flow down the Nile river,
starting around 1995, which is around during our period.
the period of our work,
so I got out some maps, I traced the drainage basin
of the Nile River,
looked at the satellite pics from our work,
and I was able to establish that
the immense amount of rains
that were hitting in Eritrea were also hitting in Sudan,
and other areas of the Nile River drainage basin.
And all this amount of water was not only affecting
the surface characteristics of that part of the world,
but was draining into all the tributaries of the Nile River.
And so the Nile River flows began going up dramatically,
starting around 1995, '96, certainly in '98
when we had our biggest result.
We actually had three different stations in Eritrea,
three different large devices working in coordination
by radio telephone,
and that's when we got the biggest result,
and all of this water was coming into the Nile River
so fast, it began filling the Aswan, filling Lake Nasser
behind the Aswan high dam
for the first time since it had been constructed
in 1965 or '68.
Okay, they had built that dam,
they never got enough water
because of the 30 years of drought I previously referenced,
so they were squeaking by on irrigation
in Egypt, which is way downstream on the Nile River.
So after our work,
all this immense water going into the Nile,
the Nile River levels rising up, filling Lake Nasser,
to the point where it's right up at the top,
and so they open the overspill channel,
which diverts water out into the open desert.
And all that overspill water creates three, four
gigantic, huge, new lakes,
which nobody has ever seen before,
which are so big you cannot even see the other shore.
You can go to Google Earth right now,
go to Google Earth, look up Aswan High Dam,
and then gyro over to the Northwest,
and you'll see three of these four big lakes
are still there,
and in fact, the Egyptian government is bringing people
there to do irrigation agriculture in those regions,
trying to pull people out of the city.
So they've got enough water there,
they figure, for at least another decade
of agricultural productivity,
even if no more water is added to them.
That brings us up to 2000,
how come you're not a household name?
Well...
It's too much, it's too much.
We live in a world where people's perceptions
are too narrow in this way.
Think of poor Galileo, I mean,
I'm not comparing myself to Galileo,
but I would describe Reich's discovery of the orgone energy
his invention of the cloud buster,
which I just happened to be a lucky guy
to learn about it and apply it.
But Reich's discovery changes so much.
He talked about this himself, it is too much
for the average scientist, for the average person.
It's a breakthrough into the cosmic realm
in ways that humanity is very poorly prepared for.
And I think, we have the makings of,
some people, we have a lot of brilliant people
who can embrace these kind of ideas,
wrap their mind around it, if you will.
But for the most part, it's just too much.
It's unbelievable, you talk about taking
a small, little project that costs less than $50,000,
probably for the whole three years, or four years
of time, and greening up a chunk of the Sahara
with new lakes.
Without causing any depletion or damage
anywhere else.
Well, there might have been some
somebody who got their garden flooded out,
or something like this.
But it's not as though it's destabilizing
anything and causing a drought elsewhere,
that's not what's going on
you're not robbing from Peter to pay Paul.
That's right, it creates a transformation
that literally, in terms of the physics of the atmosphere,
it makes a change where moisture from the ocean regions
intrudes into desert areas where it normally
has been blocked.
So it is a breakthrough, there is no question about it.
It's as much of a breakthrough as the airplane,
or the radio, even more so,
but it's not known, partly because of academic blockade,
partly because of malicious attacks by the skeptic groups,
the organized skeptic groups,
who are absolutely malicious characters,
and of course, they were the ones who stood behind
the attacks against Reich in the first place.
So this all goes into a larger study
of what's called Orgonomy,
and because we have so much more to talk about,
I would like to thank you for this part of our discussion,
and I would like to pick it up again in part two,
if you don't mind, would that be okay?
Don't mind at all, I'm delighted,
thank you for your interest.
We had originally done a second interview with James,
but the tape was mysteriously erased
when we were in the device known as
the orgone accumulator.
You can, however, find out more
about orgone energy and healing,
and Demeo and Reich's work
by purchasing one of his books
available at Amazon.com,
including Saharasia,
and we will try to catch up with James again
in the future.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(ethereal music)